[ZIP 317] Updates from ZIP Editors' meeting (#2)
nighthawk24/zips: zip-proportional-output-fee-mechanism-pofm.rst

The conventional transaction fee presently is 0.00001 ZEC or 1,000 zatoshis, as
specified in ZIP 313. This allowed exploration of novel use cases of the Zcash
blockchain. The Zcash network has operated for almost 2 years at a conventional
transaction fee of 1,000 zatoshis, without consideration for the total number
of inputs and outputs in each transaction. Under this conventional fee, some
usage of the chain has been characterized by high-output transactions with
1,100 outputs paying the same conventional fee as a transaction with 2 outputs.

The objective of the new fee policy, once it is enforced, is for fees paid by
transactions to fairly reflect the processing costs that they impose on various
participants in the network. This will tend to discourage usage patterns that
cause either intentional or unintentional denial of service, while still
allowing low fees for regular transaction use cases.

Requirements
============

* The conventional fee formula should not favour or discriminate against any
  of the Orchard, Sapling, or transparent protocols.
* The fee for a transaction should scale linearly with the number of inputs
  and/or outputs.

> * Users should not be penalised for using a small number of dummy inputs
>   and/or outputs to reduce information leakage.

Author: ```suggestion
* Users should not be penalised for sending transactions constructed
  with padding of inputs and outputs to reduce information leakage.
  (The default policy employed by zcashd and the mobile SDKs pads to
  two inputs and outputs for each shielded pool used by the transaction).
```

> * Users should be able to redeem a small number of UTXOs or notes with value

Author: ```suggestion
* Users should be able to spend a small number of UTXOs or notes with value
```

=================== ============================
Parameter           Units
=================== ============================
`marginal_fee`      zatoshis per input or output
`grace_window_size` inputs or outputs
=================== ============================

Wallets implementing this specification SHOULD use a conventional fee
calculated in zatoshis per the following formula::

>     marginal_fee * max(grace_window_size, inputs + outputs)

Author: ```suggestion
    logical_actions = max(transparent_inputs, transparent_outputs) +
                      2*sprout_joinsplits +
                      max(sapling_inputs, sapling_outputs) +
                      orchard_actions

    conventional_fee = marginal_fee * max(grace_actions, logical_actions)
```

The parameters are set to the following values:

> * `marginal_fee = TODO`;
> * `grace_window_size = 4`.

Author: ```suggestion
* `marginal_fee = 5000`;
* `grace_window_size = 2`.
```

> An Orchard action is counted as one input and one output.
> A Sprout JoinSplit is counted as two inputs and two outputs.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> > TODO: Remove this section once a decision is made.

Author: This section will need to become a Rationale section briefly saying why we chose these parameters and this formula.

Possible alternatives for the parameters:

* marginal_fee = 250 in @nuttycom's proposal.
* marginal_fee = 1000 adapted from @madars' proposal.

> * marginal_fee = 2500 in @daira's proposal.

Author: ```suggestion
* marginal_fee = 2500 in @daira's proposal.
* marginal_fee = 5000 in ECC's preferred proposal.
```

* marginal_fee = 1000 for Shielded, Shielding and De-shielding
  transactions, and marginal_fee = 10000 for Transparent transactions
  adapted from @nighthawk24's proposal.

(In @madars' and @nighthawk24's original proposals, there was an additional
`base_fee` parameter that caused the relationship between fee and number
of inputs/outputs to be non-proportional above the `grace_window_size`. This
is no longer expressible with the formula specified above.)

> Logical actions
> '''''''''''''''
> 
> The currently proposed formula may disadvantage Orchard transactions, as a
> result of an Orchard Action combining an input and an output. This means that
> Orchard effectively requires padding of either inputs or outputs to ensure that
> the number of inputs and outputs are the same. Usage of Sapling and transparent
> protocols does not require this padding, and so this could effectively
> discriminate against Orchard.
> 
> An alternative formula, instead of using `inputs + outputs`, uses a concept
> of "logical actions", computed as follows::

Author: ```suggestion
Rationale for logical actions
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A previous proposal used `inputs + outputs` instead of logical actions.
This would have disadvantages Orchard transactions, as a result of an
Orchard Action combining an input and an output. The effect of this
combining is that Orchard requires padding of either inputs or outputs
to ensure that the number of inputs and outputs are the same. Usage of
Sapling and transparent protocols does not require this padding, and
so this could have effectively discriminated against Orchard.
```

> 
>   logical_actions = max(transparent_inputs, transparent_outputs) +
>                     2*sprout_joinsplits +
>                     max(sapling_inputs, sapling_outputs) +
>                     orchard_actions
> 
> The conventional fee formula would then be::
> 
>     marginal_fee * max(grace_actions, logical_actions)
> 
> Possible alternatives for the parameters in this alternative:
> 
> * grace_actions = 2.
> * marginal_fee = 500 adapted from @nuttycom's proposal.
> * marginal_fee = 2000 adapted from @madars' proposal.
> * marginal_fee = 5000 adapted from @daira's proposal.

Author: ```suggestion
```

growth in transaction rates.

Transaction relaying
--------------------

zcashd, and potentially other node implementations, implement fee-based
restrictions on relaying of mempool transactions. Nodes that normally relay
transactions are expected to do so for transactions that pay at least the
conventional fee, unless there are other reasons not to do so for robustness

> or denial-of-service mitigation.

Author: This was a duplicate of https://github.com/nighthawk24/zips/pull/2/files#diff-25c7a2e2882ef10e0dddc86b7a276339eac6e57993a5f30866a773c4929df4b9R105-R112

> to be paying at least the updated conventional transaction fee.

Author: Reminder: changing the low-fee threshold for ZIP 401 mempool limiting could be deployed before relay or mining policy changes.

> Wallets can deploy these changes immediately. Nodes can deploy restrictions
> to their policies for relaying, mempool acceptance and eviction, and/or
> mining once a sufficient proportion of wallets in the ecosystem are observed
> to be paying at least the updated conventional transaction fee.

Author: Reminder: changing the low-fee threshold for ZIP 401 mempool limiting could be deployed before relay or mining policy changes.
```suggestion
Wallets can deploy these changes immediately. Nodes can deploy the change
to the *low\_fee\_penalty* threshold described in `Mempool size limiting`_
immediately.

Nodes can deploy restrictions to their policies for relaying, mempool
acceptance, and/or mining once a sufficient proportion of wallets in the
ecosystem are observed to be paying at least the updated conventional
transaction fee.
```

Endorsements
============

> The following entities/groups/indiviudals expressed their support for the

Author: ```suggestion
The following entities/groups/individuals expressed their support for the
```

updated fee mechanism:

*Developer Groups or Sole OSS contributors*

* Zecwallet Suite (Zecwallet Lite for Desktop/iOS/Android & Zecwallet FullNode)
* Nighthawk Wallet for Android & iOS

To express and request your support to be added to this ZIP please comment
below indicating:

* (group) name/pseudonym
* affiliation
* contact

or, conversely e-mail the same details to the Owner of the ZIP.

> TODO: Endorsements may depend on specific parameter choices. The ZIP
> Editors should ensure that the endorsements are accurate before merging
> this ZIP.

Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Madars Virza for initially proposing a fee mechanism similar to that

> proposed in this ZIP [#madars-1], and to Kris Nuttycombe, Jack Grigg, Daira Hopwood,

Author: ```suggestion
proposed in this ZIP [#madars-1]_, and to Kris Nuttycombe, Jack Grigg, Daira Hopwood,
```

growth in transaction rates.

Deployment
==========

> Wallets can deploy these changes immediately. Nodes can deploy the change
> to the *low\_fee\_penalty* threshold described in `Mempool size limiting`_
> immediately.

Author: ```suggestion
Wallets SHOULD deploy these changes immediately. Nodes SHOULD deploy the
change to the *low\_fee\_penalty* threshold described in `Mempool size limiting`_
immediately.
```
Possible strengthening.

Nodes can deploy restrictions to their policies for relaying, mempool
acceptance, and/or mining once a sufficient proportion of wallets in the
ecosystem are observed to be paying at least the updated conventional

> transaction fee.

Author: ```suggestion
transaction fee. Node developers SHOULD coordinate on deployment
schedule.
```

growth in transaction rates.

Deployment
==========

Wallets SHOULD deploy these changes immediately. Nodes SHOULD deploy the
change to the *low\_fee\_penalty* threshold described in `Mempool size limiting`_
immediately.

Nodes can deploy restrictions to their policies for relaying, mempool
acceptance, and/or mining once a sufficient proportion of wallets in the
ecosystem are observed to be paying at least the updated conventional
transaction fee. Node developers SHOULD coordinate on deployment
schedule.

> 

Author: Describe the effect on users of wallets that are not upgraded.
